                       Building Your
                         Theology

Lesson 1                           What is Theology?




   Manuscript



     For videos, study guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
© 2019 by Third Millennium Ministries
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced in any form or by any
means for profit, except in brief quotations for the purposes of review, comment, or
scholarship, without written permission from the publisher, Third Millennium Ministries,
Inc., 316 Live Oaks Blvd., Casselberry, Florida 32707.


Unless otherwise indicated, all Scripture quotations are from The Holy Bible, English
Standard Version® (ESV®), copyright © 2001 by Crossway, a publishing ministry of Good
News Publishers. Used by permission. All rights reserved.



                                        ABOUT THIRDMILL
   Founded in 1997, Thirdmill is a non-profit Evangelical Christian ministry dedicated
   to providing:
                       Biblical Education. For the World. For Free.
   Our goal is to offer free Christian education to hundreds of thousands of pastors
   and Christian leaders around the world who lack sufficient training for ministry.
   We are meeting this goal by producing and globally distributing an unparalleled
   multimedia seminary curriculum in English, Arabic, Mandarin, Russian, and
   Spanish. Our curriculum is also being translated into more than a dozen other
   languages through our partner ministries. The curriculum consists of graphic-
   driven videos, printed instruction, and internet resources. It is designed to be used
   by schools, groups, and individuals, both online and in learning communities.
   Over the years, we have developed a highly cost-effective method of producing
   award-winning multimedia lessons of the finest content and quality. Our writers
   and editors are theologically-trained educators, our translators are theologically-
   astute native speakers of their target languages, and our lessons contain the
   insights of hundreds of respected seminary professors and pastors from around
   the world. In addition, our graphic designers, illustrators, and producers adhere to
   the highest production standards using state-of-the-art equipment and
   techniques.
   In order to accomplish our distribution goals, Thirdmill has forged strategic
   partnerships with churches, seminaries, Bible schools, missionaries, Christian
   broadcasters and satellite television providers, and other organizations. These
   relationships have already resulted in the distribution of countless video lessons
   to indigenous leaders, pastors, and seminary students. Our websites also serve
   as avenues of distribution and provide additional materials to supplement our
   lessons, including materials on how to start your own learning community.
   Thirdmill is recognized by the IRS as a 501(c)(3) corporation. We depend on the
   generous, tax-deductible contributions of churches, foundations, businesses, and
   individuals. For more information about our ministry, and to learn how you can get
   involved, please visit www.thirdmill.org.




                                                   -i-
       For videos, lesson guides and many other resources, please visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
                                     Building Your Theology
                                                          Lesson One
                                                    What is Theology?

Contents
  INTRODUCTION..............................................................................................................1

  DEFINITIONS ...................................................................................................................1
        Typical Definitions .......................................................................................................2
          Thomas Aquinas ......................................................................................................2
          Charles Hodge ..........................................................................................................3
          William Ames ..........................................................................................................5
          John Frame ...............................................................................................................5
        Tendencies ....................................................................................................................6
          Academic Orientation ..............................................................................................7
          Life Orientation ........................................................................................................7
        Evaluations ...................................................................................................................9
          Academic Orientation ..............................................................................................9
          Life Orientation ......................................................................................................11

  GOALS..............................................................................................................................13
        Primary Goals .............................................................................................................13
           Orthodoxy ..............................................................................................................14
           Orthopraxis ............................................................................................................15
           Orthopathos ............................................................................................................17
        Interdependence ..........................................................................................................19
           Orthodoxy ..............................................................................................................19
           Orthopraxis ............................................................................................................20
           Orthopathos ............................................................................................................21
        Priorities ......................................................................................................................23

  TOPICS .............................................................................................................................26
        Options ........................................................................................................................26
        Selections ....................................................................................................................27

  CONCLUSION ................................................................................................................29

  CONTRIBUTORS ...........................................................................................................30

  GLOSSARY......................................................................................................................32




                                                                   -ii-
              For videos, study guides and many other resources, please visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
                          Building Your Theology
                                            Lesson One
                                       What is Theology?


                                    INTRODUCTION
        At one time or another, most of us have seen young children build things. Usually,
children don’t make elaborate plans. They simply piece things together as seems best at
the moment. But when adults build things, like homes or other buildings, they understand
how important it is to have a reliable plan and to execute that plan as carefully as possible.
        In many ways, the same ought to be true when followers of Christ build their
theology. Theology isn’t child’s play. We live, work and worship every day of our lives
within the structures that Christian theology provides. And for this reason, it’s important
to have a reliable plan and to execute that plan as carefully as possible as we build our
Christian theology.
        This is the first lesson in our series Building Your Theology. In this series, we’ll
explore some of the basic directions we should follow to construct a responsible theology
— one that honors God and furthers his purposes for our lives. This lesson is entitled “What
is Theology?” Our answer to this question will touch on some essential considerations we
must keep in mind as we study and live out Christian theology.
        Our lesson will divide into three main parts. First, we’ll look at the definitions of
theology. Second, we’ll explore the goals of theology. And third, we’ll touch on the topics
of theology. Let’s begin by defining what we mean by the term “theology.”



                                       DEFINITIONS
        Christians use the word “theology” so much that you might think we all agree on
what it means. But throughout the centuries leading theologians have promoted different
concepts of Christian theology. The word itself derives from ancient Greek philosophy
before the days of Jesus, but it never appears in the Scriptures. It isn’t found in the
Septuagint — the ancient Greek translation of the Old Testament — nor does it appear in
the New Testament. This is probably because the word “theology” had pagan connotations
that were unacceptable to early believers. Even so, Christians began to adopt the term
“theology” not long after the time of the New Testament, and it’s become a regular term in
our Christian vocabulary today. Of course, throughout the millennia, we’ve understood
what it means in different ways. So, it’s important to clarify from the outset the concept of
theology that we will follow in this series.
        We’ll discuss the definitions of theology in three ways. First, we’ll introduce four
typical definitions. Second, we’ll describe the tendencies that these definitions exemplify.
And third, we’ll touch on some evaluations of the strengths and weaknesses of these
tendencies. Let’s get started by noting four typical definitions of the term “theology.”



                                                   -1-
        For videos, study guides and many other resources, please visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



                                  TYPICAL DEFINITIONS

        According to Romans 1, there’s a sense in which all human beings are involved
with theology every day of their lives. Here, Paul explained that, from the beginning, God’s
invisible attributes and his moral requirements have been revealed to the human race
through creation. When confronted with God’s revelation in creation, even unbelievers,
however unconsciously at times, reflect on God and his just requirements. And believers,
no matter when or where they live, spend much of their time with thoughts of God. Yet, in
this series, we want to focus on theology as a more formal task — a task performed by
people who make a concerted and well-informed effort to pursue theology as a discipline
of study.
        There are countless ways that both Christians and non-Christians have defined the
formal discipline of theology. But for our purposes here, we’ll limit ourselves to just a
sampling of typical definitions from four respected Christian theologians: Thomas
Aquinas, Charles Hodge, William Ames and the contemporary theologian John Frame.
Consider first how Thomas Aquinas defined theology.



Thomas Aquinas

       Thomas Aquinas, the renowned Roman Catholic theologian who lived from around
1225 to 1274, represents a very traditional definition of theology. His outlooks grew out of
the practices of theologians who lived before him, and his views continue to influence
theologians in many branches of the church, even today.

       Thomas is a huge inspiration to me, because Thomas models for us how
       we could approach, on the one hand, the sacred texts of Scripture and
       the teachings of Christianity and the desire to be faithful to this, and at
       the same time all of the input, all of the data, all of the research, all of
       the movements in mainstream philosophy and science of your day as
       well. Thomas was known as the great synthesizer because of the way he
       brought Aristotelian thought and Christian thought together, which at
       the time, nobody thought you could do that. Aristotle had kind of been
       forgotten about. He’d been reintroduced to the western world through
       the Arabs who’d translated him into Latin so that everybody could
       read him again. And when Aristotle was rediscovered, there was a bit
       of a panic in Christendom at this moment because everybody
       recognized that Aristotle was a genius. He was brilliant. He had written
       on everything, I mean, literally everything. And then, thirdly, it looked
       like everything Aristotle was saying was at odds with Christianity, and
       that, therefore, could somehow disprove Christianity. And along comes
       Thomas who takes this stuff very, very seriously — this philosophy,
       very, very seriously — and at the same time he maintains his orthodoxy.
       He maintains a strong, deep, not just ideological commitment to


                                                -2-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



       Christianity, but a spiritual commitment to Christianity as well. And he
       begins working on the intersection between these two.

                                                              — Dr. James K. Dew, Jr.

        In Part 1, Question 1, Article 7 of his well-known Summa Theologica, Aquinas
called theology “sacred doctrine” and defined it as:

       [a unified] science [in which] all things are treated under the aspect of
       God: either because they are God Himself or because they refer to God

Two dimensions of this definition deserve special attention. Notice first that Aquinas
identified theology as a “science.”
        Now, here, Aquinas didn’t refer to science in the modern sense of the word. Rather,
he used the term “science” in the older and broader sense of “an intellectual or scholarly
pursuit.” In this sense, theology is an academic task with a rather specific goal. Much like
people study biology, psychology, literature, law or history, theologians pursue theology
as an academic discipline.
        In Aquinas’ view, the theologian’s task was primarily to think, speak or write about
doctrines or concepts. Of course, Aquinas believed that theology should have practical
influences on every dimension of the Christian life. But he primarily conceived of theology
as a science, an intellectual pursuit.
        In addition to theology being a unified science, Aquinas determined that the
discipline of theology focuses on two main subjects. On the one hand, theologians address
issues pertaining to “God himself.”
        For instance, theologians formulate what they believe about matters such as the
attributes of God — his omniscience, his omnipresence, his holiness and the like — as well
as his plan and works. We often call these and similar topics the study of “theology proper.”
God himself is the object we study.
        On the other hand, for Aquinas, the discipline of theology is also the study of other
subjects in ways that “refer to God.” These subjects are often discussed in other disciplines
without reference to God, but theologians study them in relation to God. For instance,
eschatology, the study of last things, is an important subject in what we may call “general
theology.” And Christian teachings about the nature of human beings, evil and sin,
redemption, and similar topics all fall under the rubric of theology as well, even though
they’re not theology proper.
        With Aquinas’ typical definition of theology in mind, let’s consider a similar point
of view from the Protestant theologian Charles Hodge, who lived from 1797 to 1878.



Charles Hodge
       Although Protestant theologians have differed from their Roman Catholic
counterparts in many ways, by and large, they haven’t greatly altered the basic definition



                                                -3-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



of theology. Charles Hodge of Princeton defined theology in the Introduction to his
Systematic Theology, chapter 2, section 1, as:

       the science of the facts of divine revelation so far as those facts concern
       the nature of God and our relation to him

        We can see here that Hodge’s definition is very similar to Aquinas’ definition. Both
Aquinas and Hodge described theology as a “science.” Like Aquinas, Hodge viewed
theology mainly as an academic discipline. In fact, he even went so far as to use the
methods of natural or physical science in his day as a model for theologians to follow.
Listen to the way Hodge compared theology with natural science in the Introduction of
Systematic Theology, chapter 1, section 1:

       The Bible is no more a system of theology than nature is a system of
       chemistry or of mechanics. We find in nature the facts which the
       chemist or the mechanical philosopher has to examine … to ascertain
       the laws by which they are determined. So, the Bible contains the truths
       which the theologian has to collect, authenticate, arrange, and exhibit
       in their internal relation to each other.
                                            Charles Hodge, Systematic Theology


       Charles Hodge was a man of the 1800s, and in the 1800s the word
       “science” was used more broadly than it is today. To modern ears the
       idea of theology as a science sounds jarring because we think of science
       as the hard sciences. But in the 1800s science was an organized,
       systematic, focused body of knowledge that was focused on a particular
       area of inquiry. So, Hodge opens his systematic theology by referring
       to sciences in his day, such as history, science of geography. We
       wouldn’t think of those as sciences today, but in his day, they were
       sciences. Also, in his day, science and the scientific method had
       accomplished so very much in the century before him that it was very
       much esteemed as a method for gaining knowledge. But in addition to
       that, he wanted to emphasize that theology is the organization of facts;
       it’s not simply the accumulation of facts. So, just like in astronomy, an
       astronomer doesn’t simply look at the celestial bodies and make a list
       of facts about them. He or she tries to organize those facts into a
       coherent system, and that is astronomy. In theology, the theologian
       looks at the facts of the Bible and doesn’t just list the facts of the Bible,
       but takes those facts of the Bible and organizes them into a system so
       that we can appreciate the interrelatedness of all those facts each to the
       others.

                                                                   — Dr. Larry Trotter

        For Hodge, the task of the theologian was to approach the Bible much like a
scientist approaches nature. He was to gather, analyze and organize the facts of Scripture.


                                                -4-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



Now, Hodge also believed that theology should be applied to Christian living. But, like
Aquinas, Hodge didn’t see this as the central focus of formal theology. Rather, he tended
to leave application in the hands of ministers and pastors, limiting the actual work of formal
theology largely to academics and scholars.
        In addition to describing theology as a science, Hodge also claimed that there were
two main topics in theology: first, the “nature of God” and second, “our relation to him.”
This twofold division of theology is similar to Aquinas’ distinction between theology
proper and general theology.
        Having seen the typical definitions of theology in Aquinas and Hodge, it will be
helpful to look at a third viewpoint. William Ames, an influential Puritan who lived from
1576 to 1633, characterized the task of theology in a strikingly different way.


William Ames
       In the opening section of his book, The Marrow of Theology, Ames wrote that
theology should focus on:

       the doctrine or teaching of living to God

        Now, it’s clear from Ames’ writings that his views reflected traditional outlooks on
theology. As he put it here, theology is “doctrine or teaching” — the intellectual pursuit of
ideas. But it’s important to note that he did not refer to theology as a “science.” Rather, he
de-emphasized the close association of theology with other academic disciplines suggested
by the language in Aquinas and Hodge. Instead, he identified the marrow of theology —
theology’s most central focus — as “living to God.”
        Aquinas, and to some extent Hodge, focused on theology as a collection of facts
and ideas. But for Ames, the goal of all theological endeavors involved how to live in
service to God. Instead of limiting theology primarily to an intellectual, factual pursuit,
Ames looked with an experiential — or what the Puritans called “experimental” —
orientation toward theology. In Ames view, the most significant dimension of theology is
a focus on the full range of the believer’s life before God.
        With the views of Aquinas, Hodge and Ames in mind, let’s consider a fourth typical
definition offered by the contemporary theologian John Frame.


John Frame
       In chapter 3 of his book, The Doctrine of the Knowledge of God, Frame defined
theology as:

       the application of the Word of God by persons to all areas of life




                                                -5-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



        Now, elsewhere Frame affirmed that theology involves the intellectual pursuit of
Christian teaching or doctrine. But here Frame stressed that theology is the “application”
of God’s Word to “all areas of life.”
        For Frame, theology is not merely thinking about a set of traditional, relatively
academic issues. Instead, like Ames, Frame sees theology as application. Applying the
Scriptures to life is the centerpiece of all Christian theological work.

       Theology really can go a couple of different directions. It can go in the
       path of academic pursuit, and that can be a legitimate and important
       thing. It can go in the direction of application to life. Part of what’s
       interesting is people tend to choose between those and pit them against
       one another. Within the church there is rightly an emphasis on
       application to life, so we want to know not just information, we want to
       know how it applies to your life. That’s good and legitimate and
       ultimately the right end of this theology — how we enjoy God, how we
       worship him, how we obey him in this world. When we emphasize that,
       we can say, “Why would academic theology have any importance to
       us?” But actually, it can have importance because it can help keep us
       honest. The reality is, we can take the Scriptures and try and apply
       them and say, “Here’s theology, and here’s how it applies to your life.”
       But what if we have the theology wrong? What if we’re saying things
       that historically, biblically, linguistically are just not true? So, the
       academic is a fancy way of just saying, it’s a legitimate discipline to do
       theology. Another way sometimes as theologians we talk about it is,
       good theology is public theology. It’s open for critique. It’s open for
       feedback because we want to make sure we’re not worshiping an idol
       but the living God, that that, then, for that good theology, can shape
       our lives. So, it’s got to be about application, but it’s appropriate for us
       to be rigorous and careful in our reflections.

                                                                 — Dr. Kelly M. Kapic

        As we’ve just seen, these typical definitions of theology have similarities. But they
also reflect two distinct emphases or tendencies in the field of formal theology.



                                         TENDENCIES

        To unpack these tendencies, we’ll consider first what we may call the academic
orientation in theology. Then we’ll look at the life orientation that some theologians have
taken toward their discipline. Let’s start with an academic orientation.




                                                -6-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



Academic Orientation
        On the one side, Aquinas and Hodge represent an academic orientation in theology.
Their outlooks reflect the majority of Christian theologians’ views. In simple terms, they
define theology in ways that correspond to the etymology, or linguistic background, of the



                      Aquinas




                 Academic Orientation
                           Hodge




word itself. “Theology” derives from two Greek words: theos (θεός), meaning “God,” and
logos (λόγος), meaning “doctrine or study.” So, the etymology of the word suggests that
theology is “the doctrine or study of God.” This academic understanding of theology
characterizes the vast majority of formal theological works, both in the past and today.
        Of course, there’s hardly a sincere Christian theologian who would say that merely
studying about God and other topics in relation to God should be an end in itself. Faithful
Christians affirm that theology is supposed to be applied to their lives in one way or
another. But in this dominant, traditional outlook, application to the daily lives of believers
is not seen as primary. Rather, it’s a secondary enterprise — often called “practical
theology” — that we do after we’ve settled scholarly, academic issues in formal theology.
As a result, formal theology often can be performed with very little concern for ordinary
living. It remains an area in which only a few academically-gifted people can involve
themselves to any significant degree. And a sort of culture of intellectual expertise develops
in theology.
        Now on the other side, rather than a tendency toward an academic orientation in
theology, some theologians approach theology with a life orientation.


Life Orientation
       Ames and Frame represent this important minority view in which applying
theology to the practicalities of life isn’t a secondary task. Rather, it’s the essence of
theological reflection in the Christian faith.

                                                -7-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



       Of course, throughout the centuries, there have been theologians who have seen
theology as inextricably tied to the broader range of living as a believer. But in the past,




                                                         Ames




                                                                Life Orientation
                                                        Frame




relatively few leading theologians held this view. In recent decades, however, more and
more Christian theologians have begun to reject the concept that theology should be
concerned simply with intellectual matters. They’ve argued against formal theology as just
an academic or conceptual basis for Christian living, but rather as a discipline that is deeply
and essentially concerned with living for Christ.
         As theologians have carefully reflected on the Scriptures, they’ve come to realize
more clearly that love, devotion and service to Christ entail every aspect of our lives, not
simply how we think about things. This biblical teaching has become increasingly
significant in recent decades because scholars in nearly every field of study have begun to
acknowledge how much life experiences influence their academic fields. Even the most
gifted scholars in the world cannot escape the influence of their cultures and life
experiences. And the same is true when it comes to formal theology. We’re constantly
reminded these days of the humanity of intellectuals and how their personal lives can
deeply influence their academic pursuits.
         For example, scientists and medical professionals, who were once thought to be
purely objective, are now seen as ordinary people. We regularly question their opinions in
ways that would have been unimaginable just a few decades ago. And, in much the same
way, the church now recognizes more clearly that no matter how brilliant theologians may
be, they are still mere humans. As much as they may claim to be objective observers of the
facts, their views are deeply affected by their life experiences. As a result, purely academic
approaches to theology are valued much less today, and the need for application is seen
much more clearly than before.
         So far, we’ve touched on four typical definitions of theology and two important
tendencies that they represent. Now, we should step back and offer some evaluations of
these tendencies.


                                                -8-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?




                                        EVALUATIONS
        Many of us have heard the adage, “Our greatest strength can also be our greatest
weakness.” And we all know what this means. Our beliefs, our attitudes and our actions
can be of great value to us, but if we aren’t careful, they can also hurt us. In many ways,
both academic and life orientations in theology offer many benefits, but they also have the
potential for harm. For this reason, we should take a few moments to evaluate both of these
theological orientations.
         As we make our evaluations, we’ll be looking at the advantages and disadvantages
of both an academic orientation and a life orientation in the formal discipline of theology.
Let’s start with an academic orientation.


Academic Orientation
        Perhaps the greatest advantage or strength of academic approaches to theology is
that they emphasize one of God’s most wondrous gifts to humanity: our rational abilities.
God has granted human beings intellectual capacities, and he expects theologians to
exercise those abilities as they pursue theological truths.
        Throughout Scripture, wise men are honored for using their intellectual abilities in
service to God. The Bible shows us that to be wise is to ponder what is true and to formulate
sets of coherent beliefs out of those rational enquiries. For instance, Solomon was
considered wise because he exercised his ability to think through matters. Listen to the high
praise given to Solomon in 1 Kings 4:29-31:

       God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding beyond measure, and
       breadth of mind like the sand on the seashore … For he was wiser than all
       other men … and his fame was in all the surrounding nations (1 Kings 4:29-
       31).

       Similarly, the wisdom literature of the Bible repeatedly calls on faithful believers
to develop and use their reasoning abilities.

       God has generally and graciously revealed himself to us in so many
       ways, so we can actually understand God and who he is and what he
       wants from us, maybe through what people preach to us and through
       reading the Scriptures as well. So that is there… That doesn’t mean
       that we don’t need to use our intellectual faculties to understand the
       Christian faith. Now, if you look at Paul, when he met the philosophers
       in Acts 17, he actually used his intellectual capabilities to be able to
       convince them about what he believes, and through that he was able to
       win some people over to the Lord. And I think we also need to actually
       use our intellectual faculties to understand the Christian faith, first, so


                                                -9-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



       that we can understand God and what he has revealed about himself,
       so that we can have a meaningful relationship with him. And number
       two, so that when anybody asks us about our faith, we’ll be in a good
       position, whether a philosopher or whoever that person may be, we’ll
       be in a good position to explain our Christian faith to that person like
       Paul did. So, I think it is very, very important for us to use our
       intellectual faculties, or the gift that God has given us to reason, to be
       able to understand our Christian faith.

                                                  — Rev. Dr. Humphrey Akogyeram


       Learning theology formally and systematically is so important for both
       the church and the believers to grow, through understanding Scripture
       and the Christian doctrines. The church usually doesn’t cover these
       subjects, and we need to train people who can study the Word of God
       and teach it to others in order to create a generation capable of bearing
       the message and the depth of teaching God’s Word to others, through
       their training, evangelism, relationship with the church, and especially,
       the relationship between the church and the society.

                                                        — Rev. Azar Ajaj, translation

      Peter acknowledged the importance of intellectual sophistication in 2 Peter 3:15-16
when he commented on the theology of the apostle Paul. He noted:

       Our beloved brother Paul also wrote to you according to the wisdom given
       him … There are some things in [his letters] that are hard to understand
       (2 Peter 3:15-16).

         As we can see, the intellectual or academic emphasis of traditional theology doesn’t
oppose the biblical notion of good theology. On the contrary, rigorous thinking is a great
strength of traditional theology.
         Still, as valuable as academic orientations toward theology may be, we must always
be alert to the dangers they pose. All too often, theologians gather, analyze and collate facts
about God with remarkable skill, but they fail to give the same careful attention to living
in service to God. Sophisticated, rational theological analysis often becomes an end in
itself. We commonly consider people to be “good theologians” simply because they know
a lot about theological subjects. But at times we have to admit that good theologians are
not always good people.
         How do we get to the point where someone can be a good theologian but not be a
good person? It’s when we operate with a definition of theology that merely includes
academic activities, when we think that doing theology means studying well, writing well,
and teaching true ideas.

       It’s quite possible to be a good theologian, or called a good theologian,
       and not be a good person. In fact, it happens all too often that people


                                               -10-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



       write really great books, they preach great sermons, they’re leaders of
       the church, and then we find out that they really weren’t good people
       all along. It happens far too much. And it does happen because often
       we identify a good theologian with somebody who’s smart and who can
       be rigorous in their thinking, and we don’t consider whether that
       thinking is impacting their lives. And it’s a very serious problem…
       They can be good in their task, in their art, but they can be very bad
       people in the ways that they live. Now, the problem is that often we’re
       willing to accept that. We’re willing to just sort of let it be that way and
       never really challenge our best intellectual theologians to turn their
       great thoughts into real life. And that’s where it becomes a problem,
       when it’s in the church of Jesus Christ and among our leaders, because
       the truth is, we don’t just need good academic theologians. We need
       good academic theologians who are also good people, people who are
       conforming their lives to the ways of Christ.

                                                           — Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr.


       Theology is not just simply head knowledge. Theology is a knowledge
       that actually informs both our hearts and our lives. And so, if someone
       has knowledge, if they have biblical or theological knowledge, and yet
       it’s not impacting their life — that is, the way they treat people; that is,
       the way that they live; that is, the way that they serve God in their life
       — then they don’t have good theology. I would actually argue that is
       not theology, because the goal of theology is to apply Scriptures into
       our life. And so, I would say, in the end, that someone whom we might
       regard as a good theologian but rather not a good person is not in the
       end a good theologian.

                                                               — Rev. Hutch Garmany

        As important as it is to evaluate the pros and cons of academic orientations in
Christian theology, we should also be aware of the advantages and disadvantages of life
orientations. How should we assess the growing consensus that theology must be connected
more directly with life?


Life Orientation
         In many respects, the greatest strength of a life orientation in theology is that it
enables us to fulfill important biblical values. We all know that passages like James 1:22
call for us to go beyond mere academic theological pursuits. As James put it:

       Be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves
       (James 1:22).

                                               -11-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?




       The intellectual hypocrisy of many theologians is utterly discounted by James’
words. Good theology will lead to proper living and not just proper learning. If we believe
anything different, we’re only deceiving ourselves. Isn’t this what Paul indicated in 1
Corinthians 8:1 where he warned:

        “Knowledge” puffs up, but love builds up (1 Corinthians 8:1).

And in 1 Corinthians 13:2, the apostle went so far as to say:

        If I … understand all mysteries and all knowledge … but have not love, I
        am nothing (1 Corinthians 13:2).

        The apostle Paul insisted that even if we’re able to grasp every imaginable
theological concept, if those concepts don’t yield the fruit of love then our theological
efforts amount to nothing.
        The Scriptures constantly call faithful followers of Christ to orient their theological
reflections toward living for God. We really aren’t fulfilling biblical standards if we only
concentrate on learning about theology in some objective, conceptual way. Rather,
theology that endorses the values of Scripture will be theology that fleshes out what we
believe.
        At the same time, however, life orientations toward theology also pose a serious
danger, especially the risk of what we may call “anti-intellectualism.” All too often,
Christians who value living for Christ reject the value of careful, rigorous theological
analysis. Some actually view traditional, academic-oriented formal theology as harmful to
Christian living.
        We’ve all heard sincere people say things like, “I don’t think we should get into
doctrine. That will only take our minds off of Christ.” Or, maybe you’ve heard, “You don’t
need to study theology; just be filled with the Spirit.” Or perhaps, “Intellectual Christianity
is dead Christianity.” These well-meaning believers reject traditional, academically-
oriented theology for an anti-intellectual approach to the faith. Instead of building their
lives on carefully, even rigorously-conceived theology, believers like these often simply
lean on their spiritual intuitions without carefully examining them. Now, it’s true that we
should live for Christ and be filled with the Spirit. It’s also true that intellectually-oriented
Christianity can be deadly. But at the same time, all of us should resist the serious danger
of anti-intellectualism in the church. This anti-intellectualism will inevitably lead to false
teachings and misconceptions of the Christian faith that will have dreadful ramifications
for the lives of many believers.
        Paul acknowledged this danger in 2 Timothy 2:15 where he encouraged Timothy
in this way:

        Do your best to present yourself to God as one approved, a worker who has
        no need to be ashamed, rightly handling the word of truth (2 Timothy 2:15).

       Here Paul insisted that Timothy must handle the word of truth rightly. But to do
this was not an easy task. Handling the word of truth properly required Timothy to become


                                               -12-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



a “worker” — ergates (ἐργάτης) in Greek — a term for someone who works diligently.
Building Christian theology requires rigorous intellectual reflection.
        Each of us must look carefully at the way we define theology. Some of us naturally
tend toward an academically-oriented view of theology to the neglect of other aspects of
life. Others of us tend toward a life orientation to the neglect of intellectual matters. To
avoid these extremes, we must acknowledge that there are strengths and dangers in both
views. The way of wisdom is to embrace both outlooks at the same time. We need both
academic theology and theology for life.
        Having explored several facets of the definitions of theology, we’re ready to look
at a second issue: the goals of theology. What purposes should move to the foreground as
Christians build their theology? And how are these aims interconnected?



                                           GOALS
         There are countless ways we could summarize the goals we should try to reach as
we build our theology. Certainly, Jesus’ words about the greatest commandments in all of
Scripture apply. Building theology should lead us toward loving God with all of our heart,
all of our soul, and all of our strength, and toward loving our neighbors as ourselves. We
can also summarize the goals of theology in light of Paul’s instruction to the Corinthians
and build our theology “for the glory of God.” These and similar passages in Scripture set
very high standards for our entire lives. But at this point in our series, we want to explore
the goals of theology in a slightly different way.
         We’ll explore Christian goals for building theology in three steps. First, we’ll
identify three primary goals of theology. Second, we’ll comment on the interdependence
of these goals. And third, we’ll examine the priorities we should observe as we seek to
fulfill these goals. Let’s begin with the primary goals of building Christian theology.


                                      PRIMARY GOALS
        In many respects, the definitions of theology that we’ve already explored provide a
starting point for distinguishing several goals of theology. On one side, defining formal
theology primarily as a science, with an academic orientation, indicates that one goal is
teaching or developing doctrines that focus on intellectual matters. On the other side,
defining theology with a life orientation indicates that another goal is to develop teachings
or doctrines that focus on the broader issues of our whole lives in Christ.
        We’ll build on these two orientations by speaking of three primary goals for
theology. First, we’ll consider what has often been called orthodoxy. Second, we’ll explore
what a number of recent theologians have called orthopraxis. And third, we’ll discuss a
primary goal that is often overlooked in formal Christian theology called orthopathos. Let’s
start with what we mean by orthodoxy.




                                               -13-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



Orthodoxy
        The term “orthodoxy” is sometimes used to identify particular branches of the
church, like the orthodox churches of eastern Christianity. But here we’ll use the word in
its generic sense simply to mean:

       right or straight thinking

        The goal of orthodoxy is to reach right or true doctrines. No matter what our
denomination or church, when we build theology we’re interested, to one degree or
another, in the truthfulness of what we believe. We want to believe the right things about
God and other matters in relation to God. So, it’s not hard to see why this conceptual goal
has been emphasized by those who follow an academic orientation toward theology.
                                                    Theologians are right to make orthodoxy
                 orthodoxy                  a primary goal of their theological work. Today,
                                            with rapid communication and worldwide shifts
                                            in populations, we encounter faiths other than
                                            Christianity at nearly every turn. This leaves
                                            many people confused about what to believe.
                                            Even many Christian theologians wonder if we
                                            really can be so sure about the traditional truth
                                            claims of our faith. Besides the confusing
                                            influences from outside the Christian
                                            community, it’s also difficult to find Christians
                                            within the church who understand and can agree
                                            on more than a handful of core doctrines.
                                                    In spite of these current tendencies, we
should reaffirm that developing orthodox outlooks — a set of what we would call “true
doctrines” — should be one of the chief goals of theology. We must always remind
ourselves that in Jesus’ day there were many religions, and even many theological
differences among the Jews. But despite the challenges that this diversity raised, Jesus
insisted on the pursuit of orthodoxy. He spent much of his earthly ministry correcting
falsehoods and teaching his followers what they should believe. He proclaimed, without
hesitation, that his followers had to be people who sought truth.
        Listen to Jesus’ prayer for his apostles in John 17:17:

       Sanctify them in the truth; your word is truth (John 17:17).

        Jesus was deeply concerned with true doctrine. Many today believe that we can be
sanctified — set apart for God’s service — without learning true theological concepts. But
Jesus prayed that the apostles would be sanctified by the truth of God’s word. He affirmed
that orthodoxy is one of the principal goals of theology, and as his followers, we must do
the same.
        Now, as important as it is to affirm the primary goal of orthodoxy, Christians must
also acknowledge the goal of orthopraxis.



                                               -14-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



Orthopraxis
       As the word itself indicates, orthopraxis amounts to focusing on:

       right behavior or practice

        This term has moved to the foreground of many theological discussions in recent
decades, especially among those who have taken up a life orientation toward theology.
You’ll recall that William Ames described the
marrow, or core of theology as the doctrine of
“living to God.” One aspect of living to God is
our practice or behavior. It’s not enough simply
to think correctly about theological concepts.
We must also put these concepts into practice.
Here we have in mind specifically physical
behaviors. For instance, in theology we learn
that we are to pray, evangelize, worship, serve
each other, and give generously to the poor. But
learning about these and other truths is not
enough for responsible Christian theology.           orthopraxis
These truths must be translated into proper
actions — into orthopraxis.

       The relationship between theology and orthopraxis, or the way in
       which that theology works itself out in our lives, is crucial in part
       because it’s not just about what we believe, but how what it is that we
       believe works itself out in our lives. You could think back to the early
       church, for example, about the Gnostics, and for the Gnostics it was all
       about just having this right belief, these secret understandings of God
       and his word and who Jesus was. And it didn’t matter how that worked
       itself out in one’s life because everything about this world, everything
       about this earth is accidental — there is no sense in which the behavior
       that relates to what one believes matters. But Christ doesn’t say that at
       all. In his own teachings, and in the writings throughout the rest of the
       New Testament, and indeed throughout the whole Old Testament, God
       is saying to his people, “You are my people, and as such, because we
       have this relationship, you are my emissaries to the world. What it is
       that you do reflects your relationship with me.” And so, it’s an
       inextricable bond between what we believe and how we behave, how we
       go about living that out, either in terms of ministry and those that are
       called to be leaders of a church or a ministry and how they shepherd
       the flock, or even those just within the church that are living out their
       faith in their own ministry calling that God has called them to in their
       work or life or school. What we believe and how that works itself out in
       our lives is absolutely an essential relationship.
                                                                     — Dr. Scott Manor

                                               -15-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?




         Sadly, evangelicals face several enormous challenges in maintaining their interest
in the theological goal of orthopraxis. First, people outside of the church constantly
bombard us with the lie that there are no moral absolutes, that no behaviors are particularly
good or bad. So, many of us grow weary of standing against the tide of our cultures by
insisting that there are right and wrong ways to behave.
         But even from within the church, some of our reticence to make orthopraxis a
crucial goal stems from how we as Christians have failed in this endeavor in the past. The
church has committed many sins in the name of truth. We look into the history of the church
and see horrendous behaviors that were supported by serious theological reasoning. It’s a
sad fact of history that religious people, even sincere Christians, often use their theology
to justify all kinds of terrible sins.
         But despite these serious difficulties, orthopraxis is still critical because our
behavior still matters to God. Our good and bad works still affect our eternal rewards. The
good things we do can also be God’s means of ministering to our fellow Christians. We
can still present a powerful witness for Christ to the unbelieving world through proper
behavior. For these and other reasons, orthopraxis must be an essential goal of theology.
         Now we need to be cautious on many levels. Humility and love must characterize
our behavior at every turn. And we mustn’t reduce Christian life to mere actions. Scripture
is clear that we cannot earn our salvation through good works. Still, theology should never
be concerned merely with conceptual correctness, but also with teaching and doing the
right kinds of actions. Listen to James 2:19 where James warned against pursuing
orthodoxy without orthopraxis:

       You believe that God is one; you do well. Even the demons believe — and
       shudder (James 2:19).

       In this passage James made a remarkable claim. In many respects, demons are
orthodox. They believe that God is one. And they believe this truth so deeply that they
“shudder” in fear. But the demons’ orthodoxy does them no good because they refuse to
submit to God in their practices.

       James is writing to Jewish Christians scattered abroad, and he picks
       up on their central confession of faith. He says, “Do you believe that
       God is one?” Well, that comes from the Shema, a prayer that they
       prayed every day from Deuteronomy. He says, “Well, if you believe
       that, you do well. But also, the devils believe and they tremble.” Well,
       what’s the difference between believing like the devils even believe and
       then faith that really means something, that actually saves us and
       creates a relationship with God? Well, the difference is in loving God
       and obeying God. James is focusing on not just reading the Word, not
       just hearing God’s words, not just embracing them in the idea, but
       following them, attaching our affections to God. Jesus said it this way,
       he said, “If you love me, you’ll keep my commandments.”

                                                               — Dr. Gregory R. Perry


                                               -16-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?




      In addition to the primary goals of orthodoxy and orthopraxis, we must also
mention the goal of orthopathos.


Orthopathos
       This terminology is not widely used, but it’s not difficult to understand. The term
“orthopathos” means:

       right or correct feelings or emotions

        Living for God involves making sure that our deepest sentiments are used in his
service. Our joys, our disappointments, our yearnings, our anger, our exhilaration and a
host of other emotions must be brought into conformity with the will of God.
Unfortunately, if academic theologians tend to overlook any goal of theology, it’s the goal
of orthopathos. Neglect of the emotional dimension of theology occurs for at least two
reasons.
        First, many academic theologians are often psychologically inept at expressing or
exploring emotions. In fact, the often-sterile academic model frequently influences people
                                            to take up careers in academic theology —
                                            becoming professors and teachers — so they
                                            can avoid confronting the emotional dimensions
                                            of life. Consequently, it’s not surprising to find
                                            about as little excitement, joy, pain, sympathy,
                                            care and love expressed in academic theological
                                            writings as you do in academic botany
                                            textbooks. If you’ve ever read much academic
                                            theology, you know that very little attention is
                                            given to emotional matters. Sadly, this occurs
                                            most often because professional theologians
                                            themselves do not value emotions, or they
                          orthopathos       simply     haven’t     developed      themselves
                                            emotionally.
        A second obstacle to orthopathos is that many evangelicals have fallen into the trap
of believing that feelings are amoral, or morally neutral. It’s not appropriate, they say, to
speak of some feelings being right and others wrong. They believe that the notion of
orthopathos — right feelings — is entirely misguided. But it’s interesting to note that as
widespread as the amoral outlook on emotions may be, it is much more in line with certain
modern psychological theories than it is with the Bible’s perspectives.

       When you think about the fruit of the Spirit in Galatians 5 — love, joy,
       peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness and self-
       control — when you think about those words, they’re highly emotional.
       And what this tells us is that the work of Holy Spirit in the life of the
       believer impacts the emotions. So, emotions are not morally neutral.

                                               -17-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



       There are good emotions, and there are bad emotions. There are
       righteous emotions, and there are evil emotions. Now, we often have a
       hard time distinguishing those in this situation and that situation, but
       the fact is, is that the more we think along the lines of what the Bible
       teaches us, the more we’ll be asking questions like, is my emotion
       correct for this situation? Is my feeling about this circumstance the way
       God wants me to feel about it? The fact that the fruit of the Spirit
       involves all kinds of emotional terms like kindness and gentleness and
       self-control and things like that — love, joy, peace, patience — I mean,
       what could be more emotional than those kinds of words? And the truth
       is, then, that emotions must be a part of Christian theology. When we
       think about the Bible and when we apply the Bible to life, it must impact
       our emotional lives. Not just our intellectual lives, not just our
       behaviors, but our emotions as well.

                                                           — Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr.


       The Bible tells us a lot about how we’re to think about God, how we’re
       to act toward God, and also what we’re to feel about God. So, the Bible
       is very clear that emotions are not morally neutral. Emotions are one
       of the ways that we are to glorify God with the whole of who we are…
       I pray that every aspect of my emotional response to the Lord and my
       emotional response to my life and what happens in my life would reflect
       who God is, who he’s made me, and how he’s made me to respond to
       this broken world, but this world also that he’s redeeming and going to
       bring to fruition as he creates the new heavens and new earth.

                                                                             — Dr. M. B.

       A wonderful example of pathos within theological writing is found in the writings
of the apostle Paul. We all know that Paul was concerned with orthodoxy. He was
committed to pursuing the truth. Yet, time and again, as he wrote about truth, Paul could
not contain his feelings. His reflections on orthodoxy caused spontaneous emotional
outbursts. As just one example, listen to Romans 11:33-36 where Paul broke out in
exuberant praise:

       Oh, the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God! How
       unsearchable are his judgments and how inscrutable his ways! “For who has
       known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor?” “Or who has
       given a gift to him that he might be repaid?” For from him and through him
       and to him are all things. To him be glory forever. Amen (Romans 11:33-
       36).

      Now when was the last time you read something like that in the middle of an
academic theological treatise?



                                               -18-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



       The book of Romans, in the first 11 chapters, teaches us all the depth
       of who God is and what he has done. In each chapter, Paul is adding
       something more, and when you get to chapter 11, at the end of chapter
       11, the apostle is expressing all that greatness of what he has known of
       God… When you come to know God in that way, as he did — that
       merciful, loving, just, good, powerful God — you cannot avoid coming
       to a physical, spiritual, total worship in your being, a grand expression,
       an awesome expression of worship of God, because you recognize and
       understand who he is.

                                                      — Rev. Pablo Torres, translation

        Now that we’ve identified three primary goals of theology, we should comment on
their interdependence. This interdependence is an important reason why we can’t ignore
any one of these goals. In fact, they are so intertwined that we can’t be strong in one area
without being strong in the other two.


                                    INTERDEPENDENCE
        We’ll look at this interdependence in three ways. First, we’ll see some of the ways
orthodoxy impacts the other two goals of theology. Then we’ll note how orthopraxis affects
both orthodoxy and orthopathos. And third, we’ll consider how orthopathos influences the
goals of orthopraxis and orthodoxy. Let’s look first at the ways orthodoxy, or right
thinking, impacts our behaviors and emotions.


Orthodoxy
        Most evangelicals today rightly believe that some measure of orthodoxy is
necessary for orthopraxis and orthopathos to occur. We learn from many academic and
popular theologians that we must first understand the truth, and then apply it to our lives.
It’s quite common for Christians to operate with a rather straightforward perspective on
these matters: “What I believe will determine how I live.” And this is certainly true. What
we believe to be true deeply influences our behaviors and our emotions.
        At times, as our orthodoxy develops, what we come to believe will confirm our
behaviors and emotions. Perhaps you’re a person who’s naturally inclined to feel sympathy
for others and to act on those feelings. As you study theological concepts like humanity as
the image of God and the kindness and mercy of God himself, you’ll find that the deepening
of your orthodoxy will confirm and enhance your behaviors and emotions.
        At the same time, however, orthodox theological concepts often challenge us to
change our behaviors and feelings. Perhaps you’re a person who struggles with selfishness
and greed. You’re indifferent to the poor, and you do nothing to help relieve their suffering.
Then, as your theological concepts of humanity and God become more orthodox, you will



                                               -19-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



find it necessary to change your behaviors and emotions. Pursuing orthodoxy impacts
orthopraxis and orthopathos in these and countless other ways.

       Orthodox beliefs — that is, right beliefs — impact and should impact
       our emotions and our actions and our life because what we believe
       should be expressed in our lives. And we are called not to live to be
       transformed in our minds but also in our emotions. And what we
       believe should inform our lives. The information that we have through
       our beliefs, by the grace of God and the work of the Holy Spirit, should
       transform us and eventually to form us so that our affections are really
       according to the will of God and our actions are also according to his
       revealed in the Word of God. And that is possible only by the enabling
       grace of the Holy Spirit.

                                                                   — Dr. David Samuel

       Now let’s turn to a second way the goals of theology are interdependent. How does
orthopraxis influence orthodoxy and orthopathos? How do our behaviors affect our beliefs
and our emotions?


Orthopraxis
        In the first place, orthopraxis often confirms or challenges what we believe to be
true. For instance, consider what happens when inexperienced students of theology are
asked, “Why should Christians pray?”
        All too often, when believers don’t have much experience of God answering their
prayers, they respond to this question with something like, “We should pray because God
commanded it.” Now, this answer is true, as far as it goes. But I’ve never heard a prayer
warrior — someone who is known for having an extensive, fully developed prayer life —
answer in this way. It’s true that the Bible teaches us to pray because we’re commanded to,
but a lack of prayer experience often hinders us from seeing many other biblical
motivations for prayer. So, our practice of prayer influences what we understand to be true
about prayer.
        When believers are more experienced in prayer, they’re often able to see more
clearly all kinds of reasons the Bible gives us to pray. We pray because God is worthy of
our prayers. We pray because we need him. We pray because, well, as James said in James
5:16:

       The prayer of a righteous person has great power as it is working
       (James 5:16).

        Righteous behavior and the experience of prayer yield the true insight that prayer
is not only commanded; it’s also powerful and effective. A lack of godly behavior robs us
of these theological beliefs. But the experience of holy living challenges, confirms, and
enhances our beliefs in many ways.

                                               -20-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



        Beyond this, our actions also influence the emotional dimensions of our theology.
That is to say, orthopraxis impacts orthopathos. For example, when believers commit
serious sins, they often go through the emotional experience of guilt and conviction. At the
same time, when we do what is right, we often find the joy and pleasure of God’s approval
and blessing. We all know from common experience that feelings of shame and sadness,
confidence and calm, joy and excitement often result from our behaviors.

       Recently there was a crisis in an institution in which I serve as the
       president of the board. There were some people coming from outside
       with some vested interest, especially from other religions, trying to
       create trouble in the institution. So, there was an option that we really
       compromise with them, but we stood firm and decided that we will do
       the right thing and will not make compromises for the sake of false
       peace. And God honored our stand for him, and we were delivered
       from all those enemies, and it has really led to great joy energizing the
       community.

                                                                   — Dr. David Samuel

       As we’ve seen, orthodoxy — holding to true theological concepts — affects what
we do and feel. And orthopraxis — behaving as truth requires — affects what we feel and
believe. Now let’s take one more look at the interdependence of the goals. How does our
orthopathos — our right emotions and attitudes — influence what we believe and do?


Orthopathos
       I think everybody understands from daily experience that the way we
       think about things impacts our emotions. And we also understand that
       when we do certain things, that also has an emotional impact. But
       sometimes we don’t consider just how much emotions feed back into
       the ways we think and the ways we behave. And when you do Christian
       theology, it’s very important to keep that direction of influence in mind
       also. I mean, think about it this way, when you’re discouraged, you’re
       just not motivated much to delve into complicated ideas. So, your
       emotions are impacting the way you think about things. Or we could
       put it this way, your orthopathos, your pathos, is impacting your
       orthodoxy. But on the other side, if you’re optimistic in a situation, then
       you’re ready to tackle all kinds of intellectual problems and issues and
       ideas, and so once again your emotions are impacting the way you
       think. This is so very important, and every teacher know this, that one
       of the critical things in teaching is the motivation or the emotions of the
       student and how that impacts the way they think, even the way they
       learn about things. And this is true all through Christian theology. And
       at the same time, emotions also impact our actions. When we’re
       bewildered, it’s hard to do the right thing. It’s just that simple. And it’s

                                               -21-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



       true for Christians when they do Christian theology that when they
       start drawing out the implications of the Bible for their orthopraxis, the
       ways they live, the ways they behave, if they’re tired and bewildered
       and discouraged, they’re just not going to have the energy for doing the
       right thing. But the flip side of that is that if you’re encouraged,
       something’s happened that’s made you feel good and strong, then you
       find that you’ll do what you ought to do more readily. I just think that’s
       very important to us because even in the Bible, when the Lord calls his
       people to obey him, he often gives them motivations for why they should
       obey him. He calls them to rejoice and to reflect on the good things that
       have happened, or the bad things that have happened. And that
       emotional impact then leads them into obedience to God. So, as
       important as it is to realize that our emotions are affected by the ways
       we think and the ways we act, it’s also just as important to realize that
       our emotions impact how we think and how we behave. So, all of these
       are critical to the process of studying Christian theology.

                                                           — Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr.

        We find some of the best examples of orthopathos in the Psalms. Time and again,
the psalmists’ emotions moved their thinking and actions in one way or another. For
instance, when a psalmist felt forsaken, his expressions of orthodox thinking focused
primarily on the trials he underwent and how his faith in God factored into this suffering.
Listen to Psalm 13:1-3 and the way the psalmist’s sorrow pressed him to ask perplexing
theological questions. He pleaded:

       How long, O Lord? Will you forget me forever? How long will you hide
       your face from me? … Consider and answer me, O Lord my God
       (Psalm 13:1-3).

        In much the same way, the psalmists’ emotions also influenced their actions. When
forlorn, the psalmists were not quietly passive. Instead, they wept profusely; they grew
sick. As the psalmist put it in Psalm 6:6:

       I am weary with my moaning; every night I flood my bed with tears; I
       drench my couch with my weeping (Psalm 6:6).

       At the same time, when the psalmists were joyful, they displayed this feeling with
the behaviors of dance and praise. As we read in Psalm 30:11:

       You have turned for me my mourning into dancing; have loosed my
       sackcloth and clothed me with gladness (Psalm 30:11).


       Good theology will be concerned not only with the intellectual or the
       outward working of the Christian faith in our actions, but what is
       sometimes called orthopathos, in other words, our emotional reaction


                                               -22-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



       to the truth of God’s Word. And I think that it’s important that the
       truth shouldn’t just remain at the cognitive and intellectual level
       because it impacts who we are as human beings. And anything that we
       truly love or believe in incites in us emotions and affections and feelings,
       and that sort of “pathos” side of our humanity is part of the true
       outworking of the Spirit of God when we’ve grasped the truth of God.

                                                                    — Dr. Simon Vibert

         All of this is to say that the three goals of orthodoxy, orthopraxis and orthopathos
do not operate apart from each other. They are highly interdependent. As we build our
theology, we must always keep in mind that what we believe impacts our actions and
attitudes. Our practices influence our beliefs and emotions. And our emotions affect our
beliefs and actions as well.
         Understanding the interdependence of the three primary goals of theology raises a
critical issue. What priorities should we observe as we pursue the goals of theology? Should
we concentrate more on orthodoxy, orthopraxis or orthopathos?


                                          PRIORITIES
                                                  We all know that Christians can be very
               orthodoxy                  different from each other in many ways. Some
                                          of these differences stem from the personalities
                                          God has given us. Other differences come from
                                          our various circumstances. Still others derive
                                          from the supernatural work of the Holy Spirit
                                          within us. God designed the body of Christ to be
                                          diverse in these and many other ways. And in
                                          many respects, our diverse personalities,
                                          circumstances or the special work of the Spirit
                                          of God within us, can affect how we prioritize
                                          the three primary goals of theology. Not
     orthopraxis          orthopathos     surprisingly, we all tend to favor one or two
                                          goals more than the others. But is there one
correct set of priorities that every Christian should follow? Is there one right way to
approach orthodoxy, orthopraxis and orthopathos?
        Many evangelicals have a simple answer to this question. They insist that we should
always give first place to orthodoxy, second place to orthopraxis and third place to
orthopathos. As we often hear, “Think right; then do right; and then you’ll feel right.”
        Now, it’s true that orthodoxy can lead to orthopraxis, and orthopraxis can lead to
orthopathos. But a problem arises when we follow these priorities all the time. Most often,
we never get beyond the first step. We’re so focused on orthodoxy that we neglect our
theology of action and pathos, or at best we consider these other goals secondary.
Unfortunately, because of these goals’ interdependence, when we give little attention to
our behaviors and emotions, we also diminish our orthodoxy.

                                               -23-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



        Thoughts, actions and emotions in
theology interconnect with each other like the                        nervous
vital systems of the human body. Our bodies
have a number of vital systems: a central
nervous system, a digestive system, a
cardiovascular system, and so on. Now, which
of these systems should be given priority? What
is the proper order for managing the
interconnections among these systems? We
may think about how the nervous system affects
the digestive system, but we may also think
about how the digestive system affects the
nervous system. There are many legitimate and              digestive          cardiovascular
useful ways of working our way through these
interconnections.
        In much the same way, we’ve seen that our pursuits of orthodoxy, orthopraxis and
orthopathos form webs of multiple reciprocities. That is to say, they all influence each other
in countless ways. Rather than simply being linear in their relationships, they are multi-
linear, or reciprocal, to the point that we can’t always assign one priority. It’s true that we
should think rightly so that we can do rightly and then feel rightly. But at times we should
also do the right thing so that we can think the right way and feel the right way. And
sometimes, we should even feel the right way so that we can think and do correctly. The
Holy Spirit leads his people toward the goals of theology in many different ways.

       I would say the relationship between orthodoxy, orthopraxis,
       orthopathos is at the core of a Christian understanding of the human
       person and redemption and conformity to the image of Christ … our
       beliefs, and what we do, and our desires all coming together and acting
       as one, as a sign of and as an element of our restoration and redemption.
       And so, this is what Paul understands as a fundamental goal of and
       product of the gospel, that we are the ones who actually are freed by
       the love of God to obey God and to love others and to do that from the
       heart. And that’s exactly what Jesus commands on the Sermon on the
       Mount. You know, Jesus says, “Your righteousness has to be better
       than the scribes and the Pharisees,” which means you need to do the
       right things, but don’t do it for hypocritical, legalistic motivations. Do
       it from the heart. And so, Jesus sees that as the fundamental fruit of the
       gospel of what salvation is and brings to our humanity.

                                                                     — Dr. Jeff Dryden

       How then do we decide what to do? How do we decide whether to stress right
thinking, doing or feeling? The answer is that we must develop the wisdom to give priority
and emphasis to the goals of theology that are needed most in any given situation.
       In many ways, it helps to think of balancing the goals of theology as if we are
maintaining our balance on the deck of a rocking ship. Because the deck of life is always


                                               -24-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



shifting, balance can be nothing more than momentary synchronicity. To stand on a shifting
deck, we have to lean one way and then another over and over. If we fail to adjust to the
needs of the moment, we’ll surely fall overboard.
         In much the same way, as we build our theology we have to ask ourselves which
goal of theology we need to emphasize in each circumstance. “What theological goal do I
need to stress at this moment?” “What do others around me need most right now?” “Should
I give priority to right thinking, to right behavior or to right emotions?” “Should I stress
orthodoxy, orthopraxis or orthopathos?” Then we establish the appropriate orientation for
that time, and we pursue all the goals of theology with all of our hearts.
         Much harm can come to us as individuals, and to others around us, if we don’t learn
how to shift our priorities. If we constantly pursue orthodoxy as our top priority, we easily
neglect the other goals of theology and stumble into intellectualism. If we constantly
emphasize orthopraxis to the neglect of the other goals of theology, we easily fall into
legalism. And if we always stress orthopathos to the neglect of the other goals of theology,
we easily fall into emotionalism. But learning how to balance these goals, as the deck of
life turns one way or the other, can help us avoid these extremes. So, each of us needs to
ask the question, “Which of these tendencies characterizes the way that I approach
theology? Am I prone toward intellectualism? Am I prone toward legalism or emotionalism
or some combination of these?” Whatever our natural tendencies may be, we need to work
hard to focus on those goals of theology that we tend to ignore. Then we’ll be able to build
a theology that leads to the glory of God and to our unending enjoyment of him.

       I think it’s important to remember that God created the totality of the
       person, not just their mind but created humans as emotive beings and
       as thinking beings and as acting beings. So, when Jesus tells us we’re to
       love the Lord God with all our heart, mind, soul and strength, it’s with
       the totality of the person. And I think that one of the ways to avoid an
       extreme in one area is to seek to love God in all dimensions of the
       human person. So, in other words, if someone is very emotional in their
       love of God, crying and ecstatic, this person needs to be rooted in deep-
       thinking of Scripture. In 1 Corinthians 14, God tells us through Paul,
       Paul tells us that God is not a God of disorder but a God of peace and
       that where God’s Spirit reigns, there’s an order in the worship of the
       church. And so, where that is lacking, I think that reflects the
       community is not living in accord with God’s revelation. They need to
       be instructed. They need to learn. There needs to be intellectual
       learning and growth that then results in a balanced expression — joy,
       emotion, passion, but not out of control out of control behavior.

                                                            — Dr. Robert L. Plummer

        Now that we’ve looked into the definition and goals of Christian theology, we
should turn to a third issue, the topics or subjects that comprise theology as a formal field
of study.



                                               -25-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?




                                          TOPICS
        Introducing someone to the theological enterprise is like introducing someone to
the universe. It’s a daunting task to say the least. So, in these lessons, we’ll have to narrow
our focus in theology to just a few topics.
        To understand the topics that will interest us, we’ll touch on two matters: first, the
many options before theologians; and second, the selections we’ll make in these lessons.
Let’s look first at the options that await anyone who ventures into the formal study of
theology.


                                           OPTIONS
        When people first enter the serious pursuit of theology, they’re often overwhelmed
by the large scope of the field. It’s common to think of theology as covering a long list of
subjects. Throughout the two millennia of the Christian faith, a number of topics have come
to occupy those who focus much attention on theology. The list of subjects differs from
one branch of the church to another, but there are enough similarities that we can name a
number of major theological categories.
        The pursuit of theology normally includes some relatively practical topics like:
         missions
         evangelism
         apologetics — or defending the faith
         worship
         mercy ministries
         pastoral counseling, and
         homiletics — or preaching
       It also includes a vast array of more theoretical or abstract subjects like:
        soteriology — the doctrine of salvation
        ecclesiology — the doctrine of the church
        anthropology — the doctrine of humanity
        pneumatology — the doctrine of the Holy Spirit
        Christology — the doctrine of Christ
        theology proper — the doctrine of God
        eschatology — the doctrine of end times
        biblical theology — theology of redemptive history recorded in the Bible
        systematic theology — the logical arrangement of biblical teaching
        historical theology — tracing the development of doctrines in the history of the
            church, and
        hermeneutics — or interpretation


                                               -26-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?




        Now for the most part, traditional academic theology has focused on these topics
primarily from the vantage point of orthodoxy, or the right way of thinking about these
matters. A typical seminary class on any of these subjects will concentrate on getting the
concepts straight — making sure that everyone is thinking properly. Occasionally, some
seminary classes will concentrate on learning skills. Classes that focus on worship,
evangelism, counseling, and homiletics — preaching — normally have a significant
concern for skills or orthopraxis. Unfortunately, it’s not common for seminary classes to
concentrate on orthopathos, or the emotional dimensions of theology, even in a homiletics
class. Yet, as we’ve learned in this lesson, a more adequate approach to the topics of
theology requires deepening our concern in all three directions. So, we can see that the task
before a student of theology is colossal. With every topic of theology, there are countless
directions to pursue.
        As you might imagine, the long list of topics and the many options that we face
when building our theology leads to the necessity of making selections. We have to choose
the topics and the emphases that we will pursue.


                                         SELECTIONS
         Everyone who builds houses will tell you that it’s good to learn from what others
have done. But at the same time, builders must also determine what it will take to complete
their own projects. Well, in many ways, the same is true for us as we build Christian
theology. It’s good to learn from other followers of Christ. There’s much to learn from the
topics they’ve identified and how they’ve handled those topics. But at the same time, each
of us must still determine what it will take to build our own theology — theology that
furthers our service to God.
         There’s a grave danger that new students of theology face. The number and
complexity of theological topics can be overwhelming. In fact, the field is so large that
many students can do little more than barely learn the raw data of these topics. As a result,
students often find themselves focusing almost exclusively on orthodoxy because there’s
so little time to explore other dimensions.
         Well, in these lessons we want to avoid becoming overwhelmed by the vast array
of theological topics. So, rather than trying to introduce the entire encyclopedia of
theology, we’re going to limit ourselves to just a few, select subjects. As we move forward,
we’ll concentrate on the aspects of theology that we’ll call pastoral theological concerns.
What we mean by this is those sets of beliefs, practices, and pathos that are more directly
beneficial for pastors and church leaders. We’ll be asking ourselves questions like: How
do people training for church leadership need to approach the study of theology? What do
they need to know? What do they need to do? And what do they need to feel theologically?
         Happily, we don’t have to invent answers to these questions. The church has already
pointed in several important directions. As theological education has developed over the
centuries, a consensus has grown among a variety of denominations throughout the world.
Today, there’s general agreement on the kinds of topics that need to be covered when
educating leaders in the church.


                                               -27-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                 Lesson 1: What is Theology?



        When it comes to discussing which theological topics are important in
        developing Christian leaders, one can think of any number of them.
        First of all, the Bible, from the Old Testament to the New, is all about
        God’s kingdom and holy covenant. There are also the traditional topics
        of systematic theology, such as theology proper, Christology,
        pneumatology, anthropology, eschatology and so forth. Of course, there
        are even more relevant topics such as practical theology and church
        history. For me, as someone who especially focuses on the development
        of church leaders, they need to know how to evangelize, pray, and have
        the gift of teaching. Evangelism in particular isn't just a matter of
        teaching a crowd, but a church leader has to lead disciples just as Jesus
        did with the Apostles. The scope involved here is quite broad.

                                                          — Dr. Biao Chen, Translation

        A typical seminary curriculum is often divided into three major divisions that look
something like this: the biblical division; the doctrinal and historical division, and the
practical division. These three divisions represent major ways the Holy Spirit has led the
church to develop theological education for its leaders. Let’s unpack each area starting with
the biblical division.
        The biblical division normally divides into Old Testament studies and New
Testament studies. These areas of the curriculum focus on the content of Scripture and
expose future church leaders to responsible interpretation of the Bible. The doctrinal and
historical division often divides into church history and systematic theology. Church
history focuses on how God has developed theology in the church as the body of Christ has
struggled against the world in different ways at different times. Systematic theology
exposes students to the ways the church has organized the teaching of the Bible into logical
or systematic arrangements. Finally, the practical division draws attention to students’

                                        Doctrinal and Historical
                Biblical                                                         Practical




      Old                    New        Church           Systematic      Spiritual           Practical
    Testament              Testament    History           Theology      Development          Ministry



                                                  -28-
           For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



personal spiritual development and practical ministry skills such as preaching and
evangelism.

       As we progress through this series of lessons, we’ll acknowledge the important
contours of these theological divisions. We’ll look into the ways each of these areas of
theology function and how they work together as we pursue theology. In addition, we’ll
keep all three of our theological goals in mind as we study each division. We’ll not only
focus on orthodoxy, but on orthopraxis and orthopathos as well. And in this way, we’ll
work toward building a responsible Christian theology.



                                     CONCLUSION
        In this lesson we’ve explored the most basic question we can ask as we venture into
theology, namely, “What is theology?” We’ve touched on three aspects of this question:
the definitions of theology, the goals of theology and the topics of theology.
         It’s the privilege and responsibility of every follower of Christ to build theology.
And as we’ve seen in this lesson, doing this in a formal way presents both challenges and
opportunities. We must be mindful to avoid paths that harm how we think, act and feel
about the Christian faith. And we must do all we can to pursue theology in ways that
enhance how we think, act and feel as servants of Christ. The issues we’ve addressed in
this lesson are so basic that they will impact this entire series of lessons on Building Your
Theology. And by God’s grace, we’ll be better equipped to build theology that honors
Christ and furthers his kingdom in our personal lives and in the church throughout the
world.




                                               -29-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?




                                  CONTRIBUTORS
Vincent Bacote, Ph.D. (Host) is Associate Professor of Theology and Director of the
Center for Applied Christian Ethics at Wheaton College. Dr. Bacote holds an M.Div. from
Trinity Evangelical Divinity School with an emphasis on Urban Ministry, and an M.Phil.
and Ph.D. in Theological and Religious Studies from Drew University. He is a member of
the American Academy of Religion, the Christian Theological Research Fellowship and
the Evangelical Theological Society. A prolific writer and speaker, Dr. Bacote has authored
and edited numerous books, including The Spirit in Public Theology: Appropriating the
Legacy of Abraham Kuyper (Baker Academic, 2005) and The Political Disciple: A
Theology of Public Life (Zondervan, 2015). He is also a regular columnist
for Comment and has contributed to magazines such as Books and Culture, Christianity
Today, and Think Christian. He and his family reside in the Chicago area.


Rev. Azar Ajaj is Director of Public Relations and Lecturer at Nazareth Evangelical
College in Nazareth, Israel.

Rev. Dr. Humphrey Akogyeram is a professor at Good News Theological Seminary in
Accra, Ghana.

Dr. M. B. is professor at Bethlehem College and Seminary.

Dr. Biao Chen is Director of Chinese Projects at Thirdmill.

Dr. James K. Dew, Jr. is Assistant Professor of the History of Ideas and Philosophy at
Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary.

Dr. Jeff Dryden is Professor of Biblical Studies at Covenant College.

Rev. Hutch Garmany is Pastor and Church Planter of Grace Community Trenton in
Trenton, Georgia.

Dr. Kelly M. Kapic is Professor of Theological Studies at Covenant College.

Dr. Scott Manor is Assistant Professor of Historical Theology, Vice President of
Academic Affairs, and Dean of Faculty at Knox Theological Seminary.

Dr. Gregory R. Perry is Vice President for Strategic Projects at Thirdmill and former
Associate Professor of New Testament and the Director of City Ministry Initiative at
Covenant Theological Seminary.

Dr. Robert L. Plummer is Associate Professor of New Testament Interpretation at The
Southern Baptist Theological Seminary.



                                               -30-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                Lesson 1: What is Theology?



Dr. Richard L. Pratt, Jr. is Co-Founder and President of Thirdmill.

Dr. David Samuel is Director of the Association for Theological Education by Extension
in Bangalore, India.

Rev. Pablo Torres is Pastor of Iglesia La Viña in Orlando, FL.

Dr. Larry Trotter is Pastor of Florida Coast Church in Pompano Beach, FL, an adjunct
professor at Knox Theological Seminary, and formerly, the country director for Mission to
the World in Mexico.

Dr. Simon Vibert is Senior Pastor of Christ Church Virginia Water, England, and the
former Vice Principal and Director of the School of Preaching at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford.




                                               -31-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
Building Your Theology                                                 Lesson 1: What is Theology?




                                       GLOSSARY
Ames, William – (1576-1633) Influential                homiletics – The art or craft of preaching
Puritan theologian and author of The Marrow
                                                       intellectualism – A disproportionate focus
of Theology
                                                       on the intellect without regard to emotional
anthropology – Theological term for the                or behavioral considerations
study or doctrine of humanity
                                                       legalism – A disproportionate focus on or
apologetics – Field of study concerned with            adherence to keeping the moral law without
the systematic defense of Christianity                 regard to faith or the gospel of Christ
Aquinas, Thomas – (ca. 1225-1274) Italian              logos – Greek term (transliteration) meaning
theologian and Dominican friar who wrote               "word" or "study"; title assigned to Christ
Summa Theologica                                       (John 1:1)
biblical theology – Theological reflection             orthodoxy – Right or straight thinking
drawn from the historical analysis of acts of
                                                       orthopathos – Right or correct feelings or
God reported in Scripture
                                                       emotions
Christology – The study and doctrine of the
                                                       orthopraxis – Right behavior or practice
person and work of Jesus Christ
                                                       pneumatology – The doctrine of the Holy
doctrine – A synthesis and explanation of
                                                       Spirit
biblical teachings on a theological topic
                                                       practical theology – Theology that is applied
ecclesiology – The study or doctrine of the
                                                       to the daily lives of believers
church
                                                       soteriology – The doctrine of salvation
emotionalism – A disproportionate and often
excessive focus on the emotions                        Summa Theologica – The most famous work
                                                       of Thomas Aquinas; written from approx.
ergates – Greek term (transliteration)
                                                       1265-1274 as an instructional manual for
meaning “a worker” or “a laborer”
                                                       beginning students of theology
eschatology – The study or doctrine of the
                                                       systematic theology – A theological
last days
                                                       discipline that seeks to give a rational and
Frame, John – (1939- ) Contemporary                    orderly presentation of the doctrinal truths of
theologian and professor; author of The                Christianity
Doctrine of the Knowledge of God, and
                                                       theology – Any matter that refers directly to
several other titles
                                                       God or that describes subjects in relation to
hermeneutics – The study of interpreting the           God
meaning and significance of Scripture
                                                       theology proper – The doctrine or study of
historical theology – A theological                    God; any theological matter that refers
discipline that traces the development of              directly to God
theological doctrines in the history of the
                                                       theos – Greek word (transliteration) for
church
                                                       "God"
Hodge, Charles – (1797-1878) Well-known
                                                       webs of multiple reciprocities – Manifold
theologian from Princeton Theological
                                                       logical connections among various beliefs or
Seminary      who       wrote     numerous
                                                       systems
commentaries, articles and books, including
his three-volume Systematic Theology



                                                -32-
          For videos, lesson guides and other resources, visit Thirdmill at thirdmill.org.
